Eerie Thanatos: Nigel Kneale and Alan Garner

Pulp-horror, archaic science fiction and the darker aspects of folklore share a preoccupation with exhumation of or confrontation with ancient super-weapons categorised as Inorganic Demons or xenolithic artifacts. These relics or artifacts are generally depicted in the shape of objects made of inorganic materials (stone, metal, bones, souls, ashes, etc.). Autonomous, sentient and independent of human will, their existence is characterised by their forsaken status, their immemorial slumber and their provocatively exquisite forms. \[…\] Inorganic demons are parasitic by nature, they \[…\] generate their effects out of the human host, whether as an individual, an ethnicity, a society or an entire civilisation.

— REZA NEGARESTANI, _Cyclonopedia: Complicity with Anonymous Materials_

Reza Negarestani could be describing here the structure that James uses in “Oh, Whistle, and I’ll Come to You, My Lad” and “A Warning to the Curious”: but this pattern is also used by two of James’ successors, Nigel Kneale and Alan Garner. In some of their most important works, Kneale and Garner show disinterred “inorganic demons”/artefacts operating as fatalistic engines, drawing characters into deadly compulsions. Both Kneale and Garner explore the contours of what you might call an eerie Thanatos — a transpersonal (and transtemporal) death drive, in which the “psychological” emerges as the product of forces from the outside.

**Quatermass’ Thanatos**

The television series Nigel Kneale is most famous for writing are typically described as operating on the interstices between genres (especially horror and science fiction). But I would argue that what is most characteristic of Kneale’s best work is its sense of the eerie. Unlike M.R. James, Kneale does not take the supernatural on its own terms. In fact, Kneale’s standard move — made most obviously in _Quatermass and the Pit_ — is to offer a scientific remotivation of what had previously been taken to be supernatural. What in one register can be apprehended as a “demon” appears in another register as a particular kind of material agent. It’s true, Kneale agrees, that science since the Enlightenment has maintained there is no supplementary spiritual substance, but the material world in which we live is more profoundly alien and strange than we had previously imagined; and rather than insisting upon the pre-eminence of the human subject who is alleged to be the privileged bearer of reason, Kneale shows that an enquiry into the nature of what the world is like is also inevitably an unraveling of what human beings had taken them themselves to be.

At the heart of Kneale’s work is the question of agency and intent. According to some philosophers, it is the capacity for intentionality which definitively separates human beings from the natural world. Intentionality includes intent as we ordinarily understand it, but really refers to the capacity to feel a certain way _about_ things. Rivers may possess agency — they affect changes — but they do not care about what they do; they do not have any sort of attitude towards the world. Kneale’s most famous creation, the scientist Bernard Quatermass, could be said to belong to a trajectory of Radical Enlightenment thinking which is troubled by this distinction. Radical Enlightenment thinkers such as Spinoza, Darwin, and Freud continually pose the question: to what extent can the concept of intentionality be applied to human beings, never mind to the natural world? The question is posed in part because of the thoroughgoing naturalisation that Radical Enlightenment thought has insisted upon: if human beings fully belong to the so-called natural world, then on what grounds can a special case be made for them? The conclusions that Radical Enlightenment thinking draws are the exact opposite of the claims for which so-called new materialists such as Jane Bennett have argued. New materialists such as Bennett accept that the distinction between human beings and the natural world is no longer tenable, but they construe this to mean that many of the features previously ascribed only to human beings are actually distributed throughout nature. Radical Enlightenment goes in the opposite direction, by questioning whether there is any such thing as intentionality at all; and if there is, could human beings be said to possess it? The answer is complex: there may be something like intentionality at work in human beings, but it does not correspond with what human beings, in their casual phenomenal self-reflections, think of as their personality, conscious intentions or feelings.

Here is where Kneale comes in. Quatermass discovers the mechanical-automatic-alien basis of what has been taken to be human. What emerges as the eventual object of Quatermass’ research is what Freud, in “Beyond The Pleasure Principle” (1920), calls Thanatos. By striking contrast with the new materialist idea of “vibrant matter”, which suggests that all matter is to some extent alive, the conjecture implied by Freud’s positing of Thanatos is that _nothing_ is alive: life is a region of death. Freud’s later invocation of a dualistic struggle between Thanatos and Eros can be read as a retreat from the forbidding monism of “Beyond The Pleasure Principle”, which argues that all life is merely a route to death. What is called organic life is actually a kind of folding of the inorganic.

But the inorganic is not the passive, inert counterpart to an allegedly self-propelling life; on the contrary, it possesses its own agency. There is a death drive, which in its most radical formulation is not a drive towards death, but a drive _of_ death. The inorganic is the impersonal pilot of everything, including that which seems to be personal and organic. Seen from the perspective of Thanatos, we ourselves become an exemplary case of the eerie: there is an agency at work in us (the unconscious, the death drive), but it is not where or what we expected it to be.

But this is not the whole story. The point here is not that we are the blind slaves of the death drive, but, if we are not, it is because of an equally impersonal process: science, which consists in part of discovering and analysing the very processes that Freud calls Thanatos. The figure of the Radical Enlightenment scientist, then, is someone who understands the Thanatoidal nature of their own impulses, but who — precisely because they understand this — offers some possibility of escape from them. I will now explore this by considering two of Kneale’s celebrated works — _Quatermass and the Pit_ (195859) and _The Stone Tape_ (1972), and one of his lesser regarded series — the final installment of the Quatermass series, _Quatermass_, from 1979.

_Quatermass and the Pit_ is about an excavation in the fictional London tube station of Hobbs End. Workers uncover what turns out to be a Martian spaceship filled with the corpses of repulsive quasi-insect beings. Aliens, we think. Yet the genius of Kneale’s script is that the Martians turn out not to be aliens — in the sense of being “different from us” — at all. Fleeing the destruction of their own planet, the Martians had, five million years previously, interbred with proto-human hominids in order to perpetuate their species.

So the distinction between alien and human is fatally unsettled. As the Quatermass sequence progresses, the alien has become increasingly intimate: In the first installment, _The Quatermass Experiment_ — the aliens are out in space; in the second, _Quatermass II_ (a kind of British equivalent of _Invasion of the Body Snatchers_) — the aliens are already amongst us; and in the third, _Quatermass and the Pit_ — we are the aliens.

When, at the end of the film, Quatermass makes a stand against the Martians and earnestly hopes that Earth does not become “the Martians’ second dead planet”, this could look like a retreat from the film’s pitiless message — that we ourselves are Martian. Yet even if Kneale has already deconstructed the opposition between Eros and Thanatos, human and Martian — unravel the human, and you discover that it is only a fold within the body of an organic Thanatos — he is still entitled to place hope in the science that has discovered this.

A darker version of the origin of humanity story told in Kubrick’s _2001: A Space Odyssey_ (to which we will return in a later chapter), _Quatermass and the Pit_ also shares much with J.G. Ballard’s _The Drowned World_ (1962): most importantly the theme of what Greil Marcus in _Lipstick Traces_ calls “phylogenetic memory”. In _Quatermass and the Pit_, the memory is a “literal” memory, a deeply submerged but still accessible mental trace (triggered, in the film, by the unearthing of the spaceship); in _The Drowned World_, the “memories” are encoded in the physical form of the human being itself, Ballard’s “spinal landscapes”. _Quatermass and the Pit_ is archaeological; _The Drowned World_ is geological. But in both human nervous systems and memory are conceived of as inorganic recordings — relics of traumatic events that humans must either decode or repeat.

Kneale foregrounded this theme of recording in _The Stone Tape_. Here, a group of scientists take up residence in a new research facility. It quickly becomes apparent that the building is haunted: one of their number, a female computer programmer, is particularly “sensitive” to the ghost (a servant girl from the nineteenth century who died in a mysterious fall). Inevitably, the scientists go from sceptical dismissal to a manic need to explain and map the phenomenon without much of a pause for breath.

Kneale’s thesis is that hauntings and ghosts are particularly intense phenomena that are literally recorded by matter, by the stone of the room. (Hence the “stone tape” of the title.) What the scientists had been looking for, apparently coincidentally, was a new, more compact and durable recording medium. But what the haunting phenomenon offers is the possibility not only of a new recording medium, but of a new player: the human nervous system itself. In their moment of exultant bliss (before the inevitably bleak denouement), the scientists laugh and joke about the prospect of a totally wireless communication system: transmissions beamed directly into your head (like William Gibson’s cyberspace, but without even the ‘trodes).

But the scientists’ obsessive activity ends up wiping the tape — or at least wiping away the thing last recorded onto it. Something else, something more ancient, stirs beneath, terrifying the female computer programmer into literally falling into the footsteps of the nineteenth-century girl, plunging to her death in a state of total terror. So what Kneale implies in the end is the breakdown of the distinction between the player and what is being played. To begin with, it seems that the ghostly screams are passive and inert, as incapable of exerting agency as the dry rot that afflicts the haunted room; yet in the end, it is the human beings who are revealed to be caught in a terrible compulsion to repeat. It is as if the room — the site, it is eventually implied, of some unimaginably ancient place of sacrifice — solicits the scientists into precipitating yet another death, into playing out the same old sequence once again. The human players are themselves part of an aeons-old pattern of senseless repetition. Eerie Thanatos, again…

Thanatos looms large in the final, under-rated, _Quatermass_ serial. Kneale saw this as a requiem for the Sixties: a dark parable about the thanatropic drives which youth messianism could nurture. In place of the hippie dream of a renewed Earth, his trance-intoxicated post-punk proto-crusties — the Planet People — long for an escape into another world, another solar system. _Quatermass_’ landscape was projected directly out of the anxieties of the 1970s: the choking ecosphere, the fuel shortages, the power-cuts, the disintegration of the social contract into a Hobbesian war of all-against-all — it was Sixties utopianism in ruins.

Those barricaded streets, the roving armed street gangs (inspired by Baader Meinhof and the Red and Angry Brigades) could equally well have walked off a Killing Joke record cover or from a Conservative party election broadcast. Such was the way in which imaginaries and impulses — reactionary, neoarchaic, revolutionary — became collapsed into one another (collapsed like the abandoned vehicles from which the geriatric colony in the serial construct their bolthole rhizome) in 1979.

If you want to think of analogues for the 1979 _Quatermass_, look to some of the major post-punk records of that year — Tubeway Army’s _Replicas_, Joy Division’s _Unknown Pleasures_ — rather than to the cinematic blockbusters (_Star Wars_ and _Close Encounters of the Third Kind_ (both 1977)) to which it was inevitably, and unfavourably, compared at the time. That said, the early, obsessive scenes of _Close Encounters of the Third Kind_ could almost be Knealeian — but all of that is dissipated at the end by the Jarre-like lightshow and the appearance ofthe rather cute aliens. What disappears is nothing less than the eerie itself, as the early automatism of the main characters, and many of the questions about the aliens (indeed, the question of whether there are aliens at all) gives way to what has since become standard in blockbuster science fiction: the compulsory spectacle of conspicuously expensive FX.

What _Close Encounters of the Third Kind_ has in common with _Quatermass_ is its vision of human populations entranced into unconscious complicity with the alien powers. But _Quatermass_ is consummately able to resist the temptation to which Spielberg must succumb — that of anthropomorphizing the aliens. The purposes of the aliens in _Quatermass_ remain unfathomably opaque, like their physical forms. Anything we “learn” about them is conjecture, inference, speculation. They are, in every sense, lightyears away from us.

Kneale’s great themes — the intimacy of the alien; the lust for annihilation in organic beings — this time emerge in an analysis of youth millenarianism. His rendition of youth culture is, predictably, more to do with Jeff Nuttall’s _Bomb Culture_ (1968) than it is Age-of-Aquarius utopian. The urge to herd together into crowds is interpreted symptomatically as the following of a programme seeded deep into the unconscious of the young.

Kneale’s usual cybergothic methodology — disinterring the present in the relics of the Deep Past — this time focuses on Neolithic stone circles. Quatermass hypothesises that the megalithic sites are trauma records, the stones arranged as commemorations of mass exterminations: the Earth’s scar tissue. (The parallel between astro-apocalyptic events and stone circles had actually been made three years earlier, in ITV’s memorably eerie children’s programme from 1976, _Children of the Stones_.)

The stone circles were the sites of what Quatermass ominously refers to as previous “harvestings” of the human race. Who can say what the species reaping humanity is like and what their motivations are? A lust for protein? Energy vampirism? Quatermass can only guess. Here, Kneale draws upon the eerie affect which stone circles typically produce. As I noted above, stone circles confront us with a symbolic structure that has entirely rotted away, so that the deep past of humanity is revealed to be in effect an illegible alien civilisation, its rituals and modes of subjectivity unknown to us.

Kneale was disappointed with the casting of John Mills, which was forced on him by the Euston production company that insisted on a big-name star; he preferred André Morell and Andrew Keir (who had played the scientist in, respectively, the TV and the film versions of _Quatermass and the Pit_). He supposedly found Mills insufficiently heroic, scarcely recognisable as the same figure Morell and Keir had portrayed.

Yet Mills’ quiet anger, his compassion and disgust for humanity, his slighted but enduring dignity, make him what could be the definitive Quatermass. Mills brings a terrible authority to the cosmic Spinozism of the show’s ethical payoff. When the young astronomer Joe Kapp — just thawing from the shock of losing his entire family — talks of “evil”, Quatermass corrects him: “Maybe evil is always someone else’s good. Perhaps it’s a cosmic law.”

**The Mythic Time of _Red Shift_**

It is said that Alan Garner’s extraordinary novel _Red Shift_ (1973) was triggered by the author seeing a piece of graffiti at a railway station which read “not really now not any more”. There is something so eerie, so cryptic, so suggestive about that phrase, especially when written as an anonymous graffito. What did the nameless author of this vagabond poetry mean by it, and what did it mean to them? What event — was it a personal crisis, a cultural event, a mystical revelation of some kind? — prompted them to write it? And did anyone else but Garner ever witness the phrase graffitied onto the railway station wall? Or was it only Garner who saw it? Not that I am suggesting he imagined it — but the phrase so perfectly captures the temporal vortices in Garner’s work that it seems as if it could have been a special message meant only for him. Perhaps it was, whatever the “intentions” of the graffiti writer happened to be.

If the most famous anonymous source in the world is to be believed, the words “not really now not any more” were scrawled in lipstick, beneath two lovers’ names that had been chalked onto the wall. In which case, the explanation for the phrase seems — on the face of it — to be somewhat prosaic. Someone — one of the two lovers, or one of their friends, enemies or rivals, or a stranger — was making a comment — sarcastic, melancholic, angry? — about the status of the lovers’ relationship. A phrase that is not quite banal, but which is certainly transparent, conversational — “not really now not any more” — acquires a poetic opacity by virtue of the omission of a comma. Yet, even that apparently deflationary explanation cannot conjure away the eeriness of the phrase: “not really now not any more”. To say there was something _fated_ about Garner’s encounter with this graffiti is to redouble the phrase’s intrinsic, indelible eeriness. For what does the phrase point to if not a fatal temporality? No now, not any more, not really. Does this mean that the present has eroded, disappeared — no now any more? Are we in the time of the always-already, where the future has been written; in which case it is not the future, not really?

But we are getting ahead of ourselves. What, exactly, happens in _Red Shift_? The “novel” — a label which scarcely seems adequate for a text whose cryptic density makes it resemble a prose poem — juxtaposes three time periods: Roman Britain, the English Civil War and the then-present day.

The contemporary episode centres on the tormented, asphyxiatingly intense relationship between Tom and Jan. Their entanglement has a blocked, frustrated quality seemingly from the start. External obstacles — the hostility of Tom’s parents to the relationship; the physical distance between the couple, now that Jan has moved to London — are doubled by internal obstacles, most powerfully and distressingly those generated by Tom’s obsessive jealousy and possessiveness, which becomes malevolent — even deadly — after he discovers that Jan had an affair with an older man. It is Tom’s very desire to possess Jan, to claim ownership over her very being, which ultimately drives Jan away. This quickly becomes more self-destructive to Tom than it is destructive of Jan, as Jan increasingly asserts her autonomy and ultimately ends the relationship.

The Civil War episode involves a young epileptic, Thomas Rowley, and his wife Margery, who live in the Cheshire village of Barthomley. He and the other villagers are barricaded up in the church behind defences they have improvised to repel Royalist troops, when Rowley has a fit and accidentally fires a musket, causing the Royalists to brutally attack. The women are raped, and all the men bar Rowley are killed. But Rowley and his wife are helped to safety by one of the most savage of the Royalist soldiers, Thomas Venables, who is also Margery’s former lover.

The Roman occupation episode focuses on Macey, one of a number of Roman soldiers from the destroyed Ninth Legion. The childlike Macey befriends a Celtic priestess that the soldiers have raped and captured. Ultimately, the priestess kills the soldiers by poisoning their bread, and escapes with Macey.

The relationship amongst these periods is enigmatic, if not outright unintelligible. What all three episodes have in common — besides certain differently repeating traumatic elements — is an inorganic object: a Neolithic votive axe, which assumes symbolic significance for all three of the couples. This axe serves many functions — it seems to mark, at one and the same “time”, continuity and simultaneity, as well as operating as a kind of trigger (causing, for instance, Rowley and Macey to fit).

What _Red Shift_ discloses is not, evidently, a linear temporality, in which the different historical episodes simply succeed one another. Nor does it present the episodes in a relation of sheer juxtaposition — in which no causal connection at all is asserted amongst the different episodes, and they are offered to us as merely sharing some similarities. Nor do we have the idea — familiar from science fiction or fantasy conventions — of a causality operating “backwards” and “forwards” through time, so that past, present and future have influence upon one another. This latter possibility is the closest to what _Red Shift_ seems to be doing, but the novel’s scrambling of time is so complete that we are not left with any secure sense of “past”, “present” and “future” at all: _not really now any more_. Is there, then, no now because the past has consumed the present, reduced it to a series of compulsive repetitions, and what seemed to be new, what seemed to be now, is only the playing out of some out-of-time pattern? This formulation, perhaps, is closest to the cold fatality that seems to (un)ravel in _Red Shift_: Yet if different historical moments are in some sense synchronous, would this not mean, not that there was no now, but that it is _all now_?

A whole other level of eerie repetition comes into focus when we consider _Red Shift_ in its relationship both to Garner’s other novels and to the work of other writers. The novel is a kind of repetition-without-origin. It can be read as an extension and intensification of the model established by Garner’s own earlier novels, _Elidor_ (1965) and _The Owl Service_ (1967). In his 1975 lecture “Inner Time”, Garner explained that his novels could all be seen as an “expression” of a particular myth, so that his _Elidor_ was an “expression” of the ballad of “Childe Rowland and Burd Ellen”, while _The Owl Service_ was an “expression” of the myth of Lleu, Blodeuedd and Gronw, from the Welsh myth-system the _Mabinogion_. For _Red Shift,_ the source material was the ballad of Tam Lin. With each successive novel, the relationship between Garner’s fiction and the myth which is “expressed” becomes more oblique, to the degree that, by the time of _Red Shift_, as Charles Butler notes in an important essay on the novel, “Alan Garner’s _Red Shift_ and the Shifting Ballad of ‘Tam Lin’”, many were wont to dismiss the connection with the Tam Lin myth as fanciful or strained. Butler summarises the Tam Lin myth — or perhaps it would be better referred to as a series or complex of myths — as follows:

The ballad of ‘Tam Lin’ exists in numerous versions. There are nine in Child’s _English and Scottish Popular Ballads_ alone, and that is certainly not an exhaustive collection. Many of the differences between versions are quite significant, as we shall see, but the narrative can be broadly summarised thus: a young woman called Janet (in some versions Margaret) goes to Carterhaugh (or Kertonha, Chaster’s Wood, Chester Wood, etc.) against the injunction of her parents, who fear she will lose her virginity to Tam Lin, a fairy youth who haunts the place. There she plucks a flower and thus summons Tam Lin himself. He challenges her presence, but she replies defiantly that Carterhaugh is her own property and that she has as much right as he to be there. On her return home, it becomes apparent that she is pregnant. Her family (variously her mother, sister, brother, or a family retainer) is shocked. She asserts that Tam Lin is the child’s father and returns to Carterhaugh, either to find Tam Lin or else (in some versions) to find a herb to cause an abortion. Tam Lin appears and explains that he is not a fairy at all but a young man of human blood who was stolen away by the Fairy Queen when he was a boy. Although his life with the fairies is pleasant, every seven years on Halloween the fairies must pay a ‘tithe to hell’, and this year he is likely to be the victim. If Janet wishes to save him (and therefore give her baby a father), she must execute a complex procedure that involves pulling Tam Lin from his horse as he rides past with the fairy troop, holding fast to him while he undergoes a series of frightening transformations, and finally covering his naked body with her green mantle. She achieves all this and thus wins Tam Lin from the Fairy Queen, who is bitter at her loss.

Butler convincingly argues that, despite the lack of many explicit references to Tam Lin, there are many intricate echoes of the myth(s) in _Red Shift_. The most obvious — and most superficial — mirroring is in the names of some of the characters — Tom/Thomas and Jan/Margery as variations on Tam and Janet/Margaret — but the deeper resonances are at the level of themes: the idea of possession (which instead of taking a supernatural form manifests itself in epileptic seizures, traumatic voidings of personal identity that are — for that very reason — also ecstasies); and the notion of “holding on” (Margery and the priestess saving Thomas/Macey). More broadly, Tom and Jan are pitched out of linear time into a mythic time; or, rather, the illusion of linearity is shattered by the eerie repetitions and simultaneities of a mythic time. This is essentially what happens to the three central characters in _The Owl Service_, who become engaged in a kind of deadly erotic struggle, as they assume the roles of the mythic figures Lleu, Blodeuedd and Gronw. It is as if the combination of adolescent erotic energy with an inorganic artefact (in this case a tea set decorated with an owl motifs) produces a trigger for a repeating of the ancient legend. It is not clear that “repeating” is the right word here, though. It might be better to say that the myth has been re-instantiated, with the myth being understood as a kind of structure that can be implemented whenever the conditions are right. But the myth doesn’t repeat so much as it abducts individuals out of linear time and into its “own” time, in which each iteration of the myth is in some sense always the first time. Here the myth would be something like the fatal compulsive pattern into which the scientists in _The Stone Tape_ fall.

With _Red Shift_, Garner in effect transforms what he had narrated in _The Owl Service_ into something that is performed. The reader is abducted into mythic time, as Garner’s use of compression and ellipsis puts linear time and narration under so much stress that they all but disappear. The impression we form is that it is not that linear time perception or experience has been corrupted by trauma; it is that time “itself” has been traumatised — so that we come to comprehend “history” not as a random sequence of events, but as a series of traumatic clusters. This broken time, this sense of history as a malign repetition, is “experienced” by the three major male characters (Tom/Thomas/Macey) as seizure and breakdown; I have placed “experienced” in inverted commas here because the kind of voiding interruption of subjectivity that the three characters undergo seems to obliterate the very conditions that allows experience to happen. For this reason, I think Butler moves too quickly when he argues that the “three men become, in effect, a single supra-historical personality, all of whose experiences are contemporaneous”. You could equally well argue the reverse — that rather than the three men in some sense becoming the “same” individual, what they all lack is any coherent or unitary sense of selfhood. Equally, you could say that rather than sharing the “same” moment, Macey, Tom and Thomas subsist in a broken time — a time from which sameness, unity and presence have been subtracted.

Like Kneale, then, Garner’s work endlessly worries away at the question of agency and intent. Free will is missing, or at least radically compromised. Human freedom is very different to “free will”, and can only be asserted if it reckons with agencies that belong primarily instead to (unconscious, mythic) structures that draw power from the people that they abduct into themselves. Landscape — the landscapes of Cheshire in many of his novels, including _Red Shift_, and the landscape of north Wales in _The Owl Service_ — are a crucial element of these mythic structures. Repeatedly throughout his fiction, Garner points to the eerie power of landscape, reminding us of the ways in which physical spaces condition perception, and of the ways in which particular terrains are stained by traumatic events. The mythic, as Garner understands it, is something more than the merely fictional, just as it cannot be reduced to the fantasmatic. Rather, the mythic is part of the virtual infrastructure which makes human life as such possible. It is not the case that first of all there are human beings, and the mythic arrives afterwards, as a kind of cultural carapace added to a biological core. Humans are from the start — or from _before_ the start, before the birth of the individual — enmeshed in mythic structures. Needless to say, the family itself is just such a mythic structure. Louis Althusser, emphasizing the way in which the human being is never merely a biological creature, refers to the virtual cultural infrastructure as ideology, and argues that it is not possible to live outside it. We could just as easily shift to the register Justin Barton uses, however, and talk of dreamings and stories. Garner’s fictions exceed the limitations of both naïve realism and fantasy by virtue of their complex reflections on the power — the eerie power — of dreamings and stories.