On Vanishing Land: M.R. James and Eno

As I mentioned in the introduction to this book, my thoughts on the eerie emerged from a collaborative project that I worked on with Justin Barton, _On Vanishing Land._ The eventual form that project took was a forty-five-minute audio-essay, but its origins came in a walk that we took in Suffolk, in the east of England, going from the coastal town of Felixstowe inland to Woodbridge. We were supposed to be scouting locations for another project, but the landscape demanded to be engaged with on its own terms. The symbolic markers of the beginning and ending of the journey were Felixstowe container port — an “unvisited vastness”, as Justin put it in the script for _On Vanishing Land_ — and Sutton Hoo, the world-famous site of an Anglo-Saxon ship burial.

The port and the burial ground offer two different versions of the eerie. The container port looms over the declining seaside town, the port’s cranes towering above the Victorian resort like H.G. Wells’ Martian Tripods. Approached from the countryside, from Trimley marshes, the cranes preside over the rural scene like gleaming cybernetic dinosaurs erupting out of a Constable landscape. Viewed in this way, the port appears almost as a weird phenomenon, an alien and incommensurable eruption in the “natural” scene. Ultimately, however, it is the feeling of the eerie that is dominant. There’s an eerie sense of _silence_ about the port that has nothing to do with actual noise levels. The port is full of the inorganic clangs and clanks that issue from ships as they are loaded and unloaded; what’s missing, at least for the spectator watching the port from a vantage point outside, are any traces of language and sociability. Watching the container lorries and the ships do their work, or surveying the containers themselves, the metal boxes racked up like a materialised version of the bar charts in Gibson’s cyberspace, their names ringing with a certain transnational, blank, Ballardian poetry — Maersk Sealand, Hanjin, K-line — one seldom has any sense of human presence. The humans remain out of sight, in cabs, in cranes, in offices. I’m reminded instead of the mute alien efficiency of the pod distribution site in Philip Kaufman’s 1978 version of _Invasion of the Body Snatchers_. The contrast between the container port, in which humans are invisible connectors between automated systems, and the clamour of the old London docks, which the port of Felixstowe effectively replaced, tells us a great deal about the shifts of capital and labour in the last forty years. The port is a sign of the triumph of finance capital; it is part of the heavy material infrastructure that facilitates the illusion of a “dematerialised” capitalism. It is the eerie underside of contemporary capital’s mundane gloss.

Sutton Hoo, meanwhile, is eerie in at least two different senses. Firstly, it constitutes a gap in knowledge. The beliefs and rituals of the Anglo-Saxon society that constructed the artefacts and buried the ship are only partly understood. (The ship itself and the artefacts it contains — including some incredibly intricate jewellery — was long ago moved to the British Museum. Replicas now stand in the Visitor Centre at Sutton Hoo.) Secondly, Sutton Hoo — a burial mound, standing above the town of Woodbridge — is an eerie site in its own right: desolate, atmospheric, solitary.

Another way of marking the beginning and ending of our journey into the eerie is by thinking about two figures: M.R. James and Brian Eno. James set one of his most famous ghost stories, “Oh, Whistle, and I’ll Come to You, My Lad” (1904), in a thinly fictionalised Felixstowe, while Eno’s 1982 album, _Ambient 4: On Land_, is in part an engagement with Suffolk coastal territory. James approached the Suffolk landscape as a holidaying antiquarian, visiting from Cambridge. Eno, meanwhile, came to the terrain as a returning Suffolk-born native (he was born in Woodbridge), reconstructing in sound the “places, times, climates and moods” of landscapes he had walked through as a child.

“Oh, Whistle, and I’ll Come to You, My Lad” concerns Parkins, a Cambridge scholar who has travelled up to East Anglia for a walking holiday. It is set in Burnstow, a transparent code for Felixstowe. Parkins is a close double of James himself: James was a Cambridge antiquarian who was a frequent visitor to Suffolk. The contrast between the urban world which Parkin has left behind and the empty heathland over which he wanders is also a contrast between enlightenment knowledge and ancient lore, and Parkins’ estrangement consists in large part in his finding the modes of scholarly explanation which work so well in Cambridge libraries suddenly having no purchase on what he encounters in the Suffolk landscape.

In “Oh, Whistle, and I’ll Come to You, My Lad” and “A Warning to the Curious” (1925), James discovers a template that later writers such as H.P. Lovecraft, Alan Garner, Nigel Kneale and David Rudkin will work from. The two stories turn on the unearthing of old objects — a bronze whistle and an ancient crown — which carry ancient threats. But when the BBC adapted these stories, the films became as much about the East Anglian landscape — “bleak and solemn”, as James described it in “A Warning to the Curious” — as they did about the demonic creatures called up by the inorganic artefacts.

Jonathan Miller didn’t use Felixstowe as a location in his 1968 adaptation of “Oh, Whistle, and I’ll Come to You, My Lad”, but the legendary Suffolk town of Dunwich and the tiny village of Waxham in Norfolk. The crucial scene in which Parkin (slightly renamed in the adaptation) comes upon the whistle whilst wandering among the gravestones on a crumbling cliff-side were recognisably filmed in Dunwich — a place, which as James’ namesake Henry noted while on a walking tour of Suffolk, consists now almost entirely of absence. Dunwich, once a thriving sea port, was nearly destroyed at a stroke by a storm in 1328; most of what remained was gradually claimed by the sea, so that today only a few houses and a single church are still standing, themselves threatened by the slowly voracious ocean.

Waxham is also a place governed by absence. With its few cottages and dilapidated church, it feels like the skeleton of a village. But Miller didn’t use any of the village’s few landmarks, concentrating instead on the semi-abstract terrain of the beach. The largely featureless beach at Waxham is an excellent version of the landscape as described by James: “a long stretch of shore-shingle edged by sand, and intersected at short intervals with black groynes running down to the water”, a “bleak stage” on which “no actor was visible”, and defined by “the absence of any landmark”.

In Miller’s version, Parkin, played by a splendid Michael Hordern, is a crumbling logical positivist, his mind eroding as surely as the threatened East Anglian coastline, only far more quickly. Hordern, who was never better, conveys Parkin’s withdrawal, his gestures and expressions suggesting conversational gambits and anecdotes that work far better when rehearsed in the theatre of his mind than they ever would in any inter-personal context. This is a man more at home with books than people. In the manner of A.J. Ayer, Hordern’s Parkin is wont to dismiss the concept of life after death as devoid of meaning. Yet the stridency of his philosophical position is belied by the unsteadiness of his mumbling exposition. At one level, the empty dunes and solitary heathland become an objective correlative for Parkin’s increasingly solipsistic mental state. Yet the beach is also the zone where Parkin encounters the outside, the alien forces that fatally disrupt his interiority.

There is a strong affinity between Miller’s television adaptation of “Oh, Whistle, and I’ll Come to You, My Lad” and Eno’s _On Land_: both in effect are meditations on the eerie as it manifested in the East Anglian terrain. With its lingering concentration on the landscape, its brooding silences, and its long scenes devoid of much action, it was as if Miller produced something like the television equivalent of the ambient music that Eno would later invent. With _On Land_, Eno wrote in his sleevenotes for the album, “the landscape has ceased to be a backdrop for something else to happen in front of; instead, everything that happens is a part of the landscape. There is no longer a sharp distinction between foreground and background.” The eeriness of Miller’s film comes from the way it treats the landscape as an agent in its own right. The film captures a seductive slowness proper to the nearly-deserted heaths and beaches, sublime in their sombre desolation. Parkin underestimates the powers of this archaic and arcane terrain at his peril.

For James, who was both a horror writer and a conservative Christian, the fascination for the outside is always fateful, as the title of “A Warning to the Curious” made clear. But _On Land_ is more open to the idea of an outside that need not be threatening or destructive. With its gentle, eddying movements, its bubblings and babblings, its susurrating suggestions of nonorganic sentience, _On Land_ calls up a dreaming landscape teeming with detail. Eno’s biographer David Sheppard wrote that, for all its invocations of Eno’s childhood, the atmosphere of _On Land_ “was less one of sentimental yearning and more one of introverted, sensual intoxication.” Certainly, _On Land_ is sensually intoxicating, but “introverted” seems an odd word for a record that seems so lacking in psychological interiority. There is no doubt a sense of solitude, a withdrawal from the hubbub of banal sociality in _On Land_ but this emerges as a precondition for openness to the outside, where the outside designates, at one level, a radically depastoralised nature, and, at the outer limits, a different, heightened encounter with the Real.

Eno recounts in those same sleevenotes that part of the inspiration for _On Land_ lay in his ambition to produce an “aural counterpart” to Fellini’s _Amarcord_ (1973). The shift into sound opens up the eerie. There is an intrinsically eerie dimension to acousmatic sound — sound that is detached from a visible source — and one of the most unsettling tracks on _On Land_ is “Shadow”, which features a quietly distressing whimper that could be a human voice, an animal sobbing, or an aural hallucination produced by the movement of wind. This suggests the work of some hostile agent, but part of what makes _On Land_ remarkable is the way that it is open to the possibility of an eerie that is not containable by the horror or ghost story genres: an outside that — pulsing beyond the confines of the mundane — is achingly alluring even as it is disconcertingly alien. For James, the outside is always coded as hostile and demonic. When he read his ghost stories to his Cambridge audience at Christmas, the glimpses of exteriority they offered no doubt brought a thrill to his listeners, but they also came with a firm warning: venture outside this cloistered world at your peril. Yet the world that James — a Victorian figure in the twentieth century — sought to defend had in many ways already vanished, or was on the brink of vanishing. The Bath Hotel in Felixstowe — where James habitually stayed, the model for the hotel in “Oh, Whistle, and I’ll Come to You, My Lad” — was burned down by suffragettes in 1914. Ultimately, I want to emphasise the dimensions of the eerie that James foreclosed, but for the moment, let’s consider two writers who follow James into exploring the malign version of the eerie: Nigel Kneale and Alan Garner.