Something Where There Should Be Nothing: Nothing Where There Should Be Something: Daphne du Maurier and Christopher Priest

Let’s now test out these preliminary observations in relation to two writers who have rightly been closely associated with the eerie: Daphne du Maurier and Christopher Priest. Du Maurier’s eerie tales often revolve around the influence of entities or objects that should not possess reflective agency: animals, telepathic forces, fate itself. The eerie effect in some of Priest’s novels, meanwhile, depends upon gaps in memory, gaps that fatally undermine the characters’ sense of their own identity.

Du Maurier’s well-known tale “The Birds” (1952) is an almost generic case of the eerie. As I mentioned above, dictionaries frequently cite an animal’s “eerie cry” when they are giving examples of the eerie. “The Birds” builds upon the feeling that is triggered when we hear such cries — the suspicion that an entity to which we do not normally ascribe it possesses a deliberative agency. In du Maurier’s tale, the birds cease to be part of the natural background and assert an agency of their own, but the nature of this agency remains mysterious. Instead of co-existing with human beings, the birds collaborate with one another to launch a murderous attack on the human population. This collaboration amongst different bird species is one of the first signs that something unprecedentedly strange is happening: “The birds were circling still above the fields. Mostly herring gull, but the black-backed gull amongst them. Usually they kept apart. Now they were united. Some bond had brought them together.”

For those familiar with Hitchcock’s film adaptation, reading du Maurier’s original story will come as something of a surprise. (Du Maurier reputedly hated Hitchcock’s film.) Instead of a sunlit Californian setting, we find ourselves in a grey and tempestuous Cornwall, still in the grip of postwar austerity. Instead of a flirting couple in the early days of romance, we find a family — the Hockens — defending their home against the birds’ attack. In some ways, “The Birds”, with its focus on a retreat into a boarded-up house besieged by anomalous entities, reads like an anticipation of George Romero’s _Night of the Living Dead_ (1968). The story sees the characters pitched out of a pastoral communal life into the kind of survivalist atomisation that Romero will depict.

The story’s unsettling power depends on two levels of threat: the first, of course, is the brute physical terror of the birds’ attack. But it is the second level that takes us into the eerie. As the story develops, we see residual wartime certainties and authority structures disintegrate. What the birds threaten is the very structures of explanation that had previously made sense of the world. Initially, the preferred account of the birds’ behaviour is the weather. As the attacks intensify, other narratives emerge: the farmer for whom Hocken works says that the idea is circulating in town that the Russians poisoned the birds. (This turn to the readymade explanations of Cold War paranoia makes a certain sense, when we remember that the birds have set aside their differences in order to develop a kind of species consciousness, analogous to class consciousness.) BBC radio broadcasts assume a crucial role in the story. Initially, the broadcasts are the trusted voice of authority: when the BBC announces that the birds are amassing everywhere, the anomalous situation achieves a kind of official validation. At this point, the BBC is synonymous with an authority structure that it is assumed will “do something” to repel the birds’ attack. But, as the broadcasts become increasingly infrequent, it becomes clear that there is no more a strategy to deal with the birds than there is an adequate explanation of their behaviour. By the end, the BBC is no longer broadcasting at all, and its silence means that we are definitively in the space of the eerie. There will be no explanation, for the characters or for the readers. Nor will there be any reprieve: at the end of the story, the birds’ siege shows no signs of concluding.

In another of du Maurier’s well-known short stories, “Don’t Look Now” (1971), the “something where there should be nothing”, the forces that lie beyond ordinary modes of explanation, are extrasensory perception and fate. The story is about the way in which the misrecognition and disavowal of the power of foresight ends up contributing to the very event that was foreseen happening.

John and Laura are a married couple visiting Venice as part of their grieving process for their young daughter, who has recently died of an illness. While sitting in a restaurant, they meet a strange pair of sisters, who say that they can see the daughter sitting between the grieving couple, laughing. Laura is delighted, and becomes fixated on the sisters; John is skeptical and hostile, certain that the sisters are exploiting his wife’s grief. Soon afterwards, the couple learn that their son at school in England is ill, and it is decided that Laura will return home to be with him. When John is walking around the city, he thinks he sees Laura with the two sisters on a _vaporetto_. In a panic, he goes to the police, sure that the sisters have abducted Laura. Yet John learns that Laura returned as planned; a humiliated John has to explain to the police that he was mistaken, and to apologise to the sisters. After he has taken the sisters home, he sees what he thinks is a young child being pursued by a man. Venice is being menaced by a serial killer, and John fears that the child will be its next victim. But what he thought was a child turns out to be murderous dwarf — presumably the serial killer — who kills John. As he dies, John only now realises that his seeing the sisters with Laura was a case of foresight, a glimpse into the near future when the three would be together at his own funeral:

And he saw the vaporetto with Laura and the two sisters steaming down the Grand Canal, not today, not tomorrow, but the day after that and he knew why they were together and for what sad purpose they had come. The creature was gibbering in its corner. The hammering and the voices and the barking dog grew fainter, and ‘Oh God,’ he thought, ‘What a bloody silly way to die…’

In some ways, the structure that emerges here is similar to the time loop that we discussed earlier, but the loop here is less tight, and the register is eerie rather than weird, because the emphasis is on an obscured agent: fate itself. Fate here is certainly terrifying, but, as John realises in his dying moments, the patterns it weaves exhibit a certain artistry that in the end is ironic, and perhaps even macabrely comic, as well as harrowing. One irony is that, precisely because it is not recognised as such, John’s foresight does not allow fate’s patterns to be foreseen. John shares the disavowal of his own powers of extrasensory perception with another male fatally defined by self-blinding, _The Shining_’s Jack Torrance, who we shall discuss in a later chapter. As with Jack Torrance, extrasensory perception compromises John’s masculine sense of self-determination; like Jack, John’s underestimating of the forces that threaten this — ultimately illusory — self-possession feed into the power of those very forces, which in the end leads to his destruction.

Nic Roeg’s film adaptation (1973) (of which, this time, du Maurier approved) is an exercise in the poetics of fate. Here as in so many of his films, Roeg works with parallels, pre-figurations and echoes, inviting us to see time as a rhyming structure. The redness of the stain on a slide that John is studying rhymes with the redness of the raincoat his daughter is wearing when she dies; but his daughter’s death is not so much a completed catastrophe as the opening moment in a grim poetic pattern that will only be closed with John’s death, at the hands of the dwarf wearing a near-identical red raincoat. As Roeg heightens our sensitivity to these rhymes, he suggests the eerie contours of fateful forces that will never fully come into view. Repetitions of colour are supplemented by sonic doublings. In keeping with the story, Roeg’s rendering of Venice is intensely eerie, and much of this has to do with the use of sound. Roeg took advantage of the way in which Venice acts as a sound maze, its architecture generating “schizophonic” effects by separating sounds from their sources, producing a duplicitous sonic space. John and Laura often lose their way, returning inadvertently to places they had just left, retracing their steps and doubling back, wandering around a city that is a dubious labyrinth, and the fragmented image of a fate that can only be recognised too late.

If these two works by du Maurier are about an agency that should not be there — the collective cunning of birds; the poetic weaving of fate — then Christopher Priest’s novels _The Affirmation_ (1981) and _The Glamour_ (1984) are organised around absences, gaps where agency should be. The two lead characters are defined by gaps in the stories that they can tell about themselves, and one effect of Priest’s work (like that of Alan Garner, to which we shall turn later) is to make us appreciate the eerie power of stories.

_The Affirmation_ appears at first to be the story of a young man, Peter Sinclair, who has had a breakdown after a relationship has collapsed and he has lost his job. A meeting with an older acquaintance leads to Sinclair taking up an offer to live in the older man’s second home, a rundown cottage in rural Herefordshire, in exchange for decorating and renovating the property. While he is at the cottage, Sinclair starts writing what he comes to think of as an autobiographical work, a piece of writing that will finally explain his own life to him. We do not at first see this text — perhaps we never see it — only Sinclair’s alternately euphoric and tortured thoughts about it. Sinclair admits that he has begun to embellish and indeed wholly alter elements of the narrative — changing relatively trivial details such as the names of places and characters, but also personality traits and key events, rationalizing that these amendments mean that the novel will have fidelity to a “higher truth”. This is what many novelists would claim, and Priest is no doubt having a self-mocking joke at his own expense here.

When we eventually see it, Sinclair’s “autobiographical” text appears to be nothing of the sort: it looks like a work of extravagant fantasy (indeed it appears to belong almost to the fantasy genre). Actually, we are never certain that what we are reading is Sinclair’s autobiographical manuscript; in at least one version of what happens, the treasured manuscript which Sinclair carries around with him is nothing more than a sheaf of empty papers. But in the manuscript that we read, Sinclair becomes the winner of a special lottery, run on a place called Collago, an island that is part of a “Dream Archipelago” — a vast island group that, as its name suggests, appears to be at least as much a state of mind as a geographical location. The lottery allows winners to undergo a process called “athanasia”, which will give them a limited kind of immortality — their bodies will be cleansed of any morbidities and will be immune from contracting any future illnesses, but they may still die as a result of accidents. However, the athanasia process involves them losing their memory entirely. Their personalities will be rebuilt on the basis of a detailed questionnaire which they complete before the athanasia operation. However, Sinclair insists that those conducting his rehabilitation use his own autobiographical text instead (which cannot now, evidently, be quite the same text as the one we are reading: it must exist one level “down” from _this_ narrative about the archipelago and the lottery).

In the remainder of _The Affirmation_, the relationship between the narrative lines set in real world locations and those which take place in the Dream Archipelago becomes increasingly tangled. It appears that Sinclair — or some part of Sinclair — is proliferating fractured narratives in order to deflect from the trauma of his role in the suicide of his lover, Gracia.

An episode from Sinclair’s childhood provides what might be the key to the whole novel. He recalls an incident where, after an accident, he retrospectively lost any memory of the previous three days:

During these three days, I must have been alert, conscious and self-aware, feeling the continuity of memory, sure of my identity and existence. An event that _followed_ them, though, eradicated them, just as one day death would erase all memory. It was my first experience of a kind of death and, since then, although unconsciousness itself was not to be feared, I saw memory as the key to sentience. I existed as long as I remembered.

The irony is that the Sinclair of the Dream Archipelago undergoes the “death” of amnesia in order to achieve immortality. And if Sinclair exists “as long as he remembers”, the problem is that the different versions of Sinclair do _not_ remember: the “this-world” Sinclair because his consciousness has fragmented under pressure from Gracia’s suicide; the Dream Archipelago Sinclair because he has submitted to the athanasia process.

What is eerie here is the agency of the unconscious itself. _The Affirmation_ can be read as an extended reflection on the conundrum of how it is possible to conceal something from ourselves, how a single entity can be simultaneously the one who is hiding something and the one from whom the thing is hidden. This can only happen because the unity and transparency which we ordinarily ascribe to our minds are illusory. Gaps and inconsistencies are constitutive of what we are. What covers over these lacunae are stories — which therefore possess their own agency. Memory is already a story, and when there are gaps in memory, new stories must be confabulated to fill in the holes. But who is the author of these stories? The answer is that there is not so much an author as a confabulatory process without any “one” behind it. This process isn’t a pathological deviation from the norm, but the way in which identity ordinarily functions. However, this functioning is usually obscured, and only comes into view when something goes wrong — when the stories fail, and the question about the machinery that produces them becomes unavoidable.

Priest’s novel _The Glamour_ returns to many of these preoccupations, particularly the problems of amnesia and confabulation. Richard Grey is a cameraman who has lost his memory as a result of being caught in a terrorist bomb blast. He is recovering in a hospital in Devon, when he is visited by a woman, Susan Kewley, who claims to have been his girlfriend. Like _The Affirmation_, the novel turns on the relationship between gaps and stories, with memory understood as a particular kind of story, susceptible to manipulation and reconstruction. For instance, one of the doctors working on Grey’s rehabilitation refers to the condition of “hysterical paramnesia”, in which patients confabulate a whole “remembered” world on the basis of a few fragments.

The novel offers alternate versions of how Richard and Susan met. In the first version, the one that Richard initially believes, and which he seems to have recovered via hypnosis, the couple met while on holiday in France. Their developing relationship was overshadowed by the presence of Susan’s manipulative lover, Niall, with whom she wants to break off, but who has a sinister hold over her. Yet Susan utterly rejects this account, claiming that she has never been to France, and that their affair — again with Niall always in the background — actually took place in London. There is something intensely eerie about the retrospective downgrading of the episodes in France. To the reader — and presumably to Grey — the events in France have a vividness which makes them “feel” at least as real, if not more real, than the episodes in London narrated by Kewley. (This is something like a reverse of the effect of what happens in _The Affirmation_: the Dream Archipelago scenes appear at first to be a fantasy or a fiction-within-a-fiction, ontologically inferior to the episodes which happen in the real-world locations, but they attain a vividness which exceeds that of the more “realistic” sections of the novel.) If the French story was not real, we are confronted, as in _The Affirmation_, with the question of the agent that produced it. At the climax of _The Glamour_, we seem to receive an answer to this question: in a metafictional twist, Niall claims to be the narrator of the whole novel, and it is Niall who has “fed” Richard his false memories of the France trip. If the overwhelming effect of this revelation is to somewhat dissipate the sense of the eerie that the novel has built up — we now seem to know the precise nature of the agent which has produced all these stories — we are still left with the problem of the scope of Niall’s influence: how much of what we have read is Niall’s contrivance, how much belongs to what Niall still calls Richard’s “real life”, and to what extent can Niall’s fictions be separated from this “real life”? If Richard has a “real life” beyond Niall, this implies that Niall is “only” the narrator, someone who is telling Richard’s story, not his author-creator — despite Niall’s claim that “I have made you, Grey.”

The metafictional struggle between Niall and Richard can be read as part of the novel’s core preoccupation with the question of invisibility. If Niall is the narrator, he is a “level up” from the characters he is narrating, and therefore not fully visible to them (they can interact with Niall the character, but not with Niall the narrator). But the novel is about invisibility in a seemingly more straightforward way. Niall, Susan and to some extent Richard himself apparently have “the glamour”. Glamour, the novel explains, is an old Scottish word, and

\[i\]n the original sense a glamour was a spell, an enchantment. A young man in love would approach the wisest old woman in his village and pay her for a charm of invisibility to be placed on his beloved, so that she could no longer be coveted by the other young men. Once she had been glammered, or made glamorous, she was free from prying eyes.

The novel is ambivalent about how this disappearance is produced — is it an induced failure to see? Do some people simply escape notice, and forever fall into the background? Or is it some form of sorcery which allows Niall and the others not be seen (but would this ultimately be any different from an induced failure to see in any case)?

Disappearance, alongside amnesia, is a clear case of “nothing where there should be something”. But the two cases are very different. Whereas amnesia generates a gap that is perceived and felt — a gap that demands filling by a story; disappearance is a gap which conceals itself. It is an example of negative hallucination, a concept which is introduced into the novel when, while under hypnotic suggestion, Grey is induced not to see a woman who is in the same room as him. Negative hallucination is a phenomenon that is in many ways more interesting — and more eerie — than “positive” hallucination. _Not seeing what is there_ is both stranger and more commonplace than seeing what is not there. Failure to see, the involuntary process of overlooking material which contradicts — or simply does not fit in with — the dominant stories which we tell ourselves is part of the ongoing “editing process” through which what we experience as identity is produced. In negative hallucination, objects and entities are typically registered but not seen. If, say, someone is induced into not seeing a box lying on the floor, they will nevertheless swerve to avoid the box when they walk across the room, and what is more they will produce a rationale, a little story, explaining why they have done so. It was Freud who introduced the concept of negative hallucination, and, as with confabulation, the phenomenon illuminates the eerie qualities of the unconscious, its negative production. The unconscious, something which is itself a gap, an invisibility, is also the producer of gaps which are not seen.