   

# The Ache of Nostalgia:The Advisory Circle

‘The Advisory Circle – helping you make the right decisions.’ With its suggestions of a benevolent bureaucracy, The Advisory Circle was always the perfect name for a Ghost Box act. On Mind How You Go (2005), producer and vinyl archivist Jon Brooks produced a kind of Anglo-analogue pastoralism that is as affecting as anything that the label has released. In what has since been established to be the customary Ghost Box fashion, Brooks’s analogue synthesizer doodles – all the more powerful, somehow, for their unassuming slightness – gently trigger drifts down (false) memory lanes, inducing you to recall a mass mediated past which you never quite experienced. Mind How You Go frequently invokes that talisman of 1970s paternalism, the Public Information Film, and it’s perhaps no accident that the rise of Ghost Box has coincided with the emergence of YouTube, which has made public information films and other such street furniture of 1970s audio–visual experience widely available again.

What Brooks captures extremely poignantly is the conflicted cluster of emotions involved in nostalgic longing. ‘Mind How You Go’ and ‘Nuclear Substation’ summon remembered sunlight from childhood summers even as their doleful melodies are laced with a deep sense of loss. Yet there’s a very definite but subdued joy here, too, in the way that a track such as ‘Osprey’ achieves a kind of faltering soaring. It’s not for nothing that the word ache is often associated with nostalgia; and The Advisory Circle’s music positively aches with a sadness that is simultaneously painful and enjoyable. 2011’s As The Crow Flies felt folkier than The Advisory Circle’s previous releases, with acoustic guitars creeping over the analogue synthesizers like ivy spreading over the frontage of a brutalist building. The album’s  closing track, ‘Lonely Signalman’, brings these different textures together beautifully: its vocodered refrain (‘signalman lives all alone/ signalman is all alone’) is simultaneously playful and plangent, a combination that is typical of Brooks’s work. I asked Brooks about the roots of the exquisite sadness that colours his music.

‘A lot of it stems from my childhood. Without wishing to go too far down the ‘tortured artist’ path, I will say that my upbringing was a cyclic period of safety, security, contentment, anxiety, despair and sadness. As an adult, I’ve managed to work through a lot of these childhood feelings and channel them into what I’m doing musically. Thankfully, I can now make sense of a lot of stuff that happened back then; I can balance this against any residual scars I might be left with. I’m not saying I’m glad that I had a turbulent childhood, but for what it’s worth, it has shaped my art, quite indelibly.’A paradoxical impulse lies behind Brooks’s work. He is fascinated by functional culture – that which we don’t consciously hear or see but which shapes our experience of environments – yet the attention on what was background necessarily pushes it into the foreground. 2011’s Music For Dieter Rams, a homage to the designer best known for his work with Braun released under Brooks’s name, was an attempt to bring functional music together with functional design. Rams’s slogan ‘less, but better’ could equally apply to the original conception of Ambient music. After all, What was the ambition for Ambient if not that music attain the unassuming ubiquity of many of Rams’s products – all those radios, coffee makers and calculators which were embedded into everyday life, their designer unknown to the general public? Perhaps for that reason, Brooks isn’t the first artist to dedicate music to Rams: Alva Noto devoted two wonderfully eerie tracks on his For 2 album to the designer. It’s those things lurking at the background of attention, things that we took for granted at the time, which now evoke the past most powerfully.

‘With hindsight,’ Brooks says, ‘the fact that these things are so evocative of the past, accentuates and crystallises my interest in them; but actually, I’ve always been interested in things ‘in the background’ – for me, that’s where the really interesting stuff has always been. As a kid, I was equally fascinated by library music used on TV (or TV themes) as I was about pop music; things that we weren’t supposed to take any real notice of. I used to look out for TV test transmissions, for example, and of course Public Information Films. Open University broadcasts held the same fascination; these broadcasts weren’t targeted at an eight-year-old child, but I was drawn towards them nonetheless. I was also drawn to logos, branding and so forth. I remember being particularly entranced by certain record labels’ logos – Polydor, Decca and Pye were my favourites. I loved the way they looked on the records and would quite often sit at the turntable and watch them go round, as the record played. There was something very elegant about them. Again, these things were presented as ‘functional’, in their own way. So, the fascination was always there. It’s just stayed with me.’

Those objects and spaces are also functional. Is Brooks particularly fascinated by culture that operates in this ostensibly functional way?

‘I am absolutely fascinated by that aspect. At the risk of being slightly tangential, taking the concept of Muzak as an example, I very much enjoyed reading Joseph Lanza’s Elevator Music. This is a great example of bringing the background to the foreground, in the form of strictly ‘functional’ music. It goes a step further in this respect than even Library music does. I have always been fascinated by the cultural aspect of this – how we can have small speakers installed in ceilings in shops and the music just filters through and no-one is really supposed to notice; they called it ‘non-entertainment music’ at the time. Muzak gained a really bad reputation in the 1970s, but if you go back and listen to some of the music that was produced for the system, you’ll find some  very tight, compact arrangements hidden in there. Composers that are highly regarded by record collectors now, for example Sven Libaek and Syd Dale, did a lot of work for Muzak. In much the same way, I apply this fascination to domestic design or motorway service stations. Dieter Rams was interested in creating something that just worked, with elegance and simplicity. I love the fact that he wasn’t searching for fame with his designs, but now we can celebrate those designs publicly and hand him the spotlight, as it were, in much the same way as we have discovered composers like Sven Libaek.’

