   

# The Lost Unconscious: Christopher Nolan’sInception

Film Quarterly, Vol. 64, No. 3, 2011In Christopher Nolan’s breakthrough memory-loss thriller Memento from 2000, the traumatised and heavily tattooed protagonist Lenny has a suggestive conversation with a detective:TEDDY: Look at your police file. It was complete when I gave it to you. Who took the twelve pages out?LEONARD: You, probably.TEDDY: No, you took them out.LEONARD: Why would I do that?TEDDY: To set yourself a puzzle you won’t ever solve.Like Lenny, Christopher Nolan has specialised in setting puzzles that can’t be solved. Duplicity – in the sense of both deception and doubling – runs right through his work. It’s not only the case that Nolan’s work is about duplicity; it is itself duplicitous, drawing audiences into labyrinths of indeterminacy.

Nolan’s films have a coolly obsessive quality, in which a number of repeating elements – a traumatised hero and his antagonist; a dead woman; a plot involving manipulation and dissimulation – are reshuffled. These film noir tropes are then further scrambled in the manner of a certain kind of neo-noir. Nolan acknowledges Angel Heart (1987) and The Usual Suspects (1995) as touchstones (he mentions both in an interview which is included on the Memento DVD, singling out Parker’s film as a particular inspiration), but one can also see parallels with the meta-detective fictions of Robbe-Grillet and Paul Auster. There’s a shift from the epistemological problems posed by unreliable narrators to a more general ontological indeterminacy, in which  the nature of the whole fictional world is put into doubt.



Memento remains emblematic in this respect. At first glance, the film’s enigma resolves relatively simply. Lenny, who suffers from anterograde amnesiac condition which means that he can’t make new memories, is ‘setting puzzles for himself that can’t be solved’ so that he can always be pursuing his wife’s murderer, long after Lenny has killed him. But after repeated viewings, the critic Andy Klein – in a piece for  [Salon.com](http://www.Salon.com) pointedly entitled ‘Everything You Wanted To Know About _Memento’–_ conceded that he wasn’t ‘able to come up with the ‘truth’ about what transpired prior to the film’s action. Every explanation seems to involve some breach of the apparent ‘rules’ of Leonard’s disability – not merely the rules as he explains them, but the rules as we witness them operating throughout most of the film.) The rules are crucial to Nolan’s method. If _Memento_ is a kind of impossible object, then its impossibility is generated not via an anything-goes ontological anarchy but by the setting up of rules which it violates in particular ways – just as the effect of Escher’s paintings depend upon unsettling rather than ignoring the rules of perspective.

Nolan nevertheless maintains that, however intractable his films might appear, they are always based on a definitive truth which he knows but will not reveal. As he said of _Inception_ in the interview with _Wired, ‘I’ve_ always believed that if you make a film with ambiguity, it needs to be based on a true interpretation. If it’s not, then it will contradict itself, or it will be somehow insubstantial and end up making the audience feel cheated. Ambiguity has to come from the inability of the character to know – and the alignment of the audience with that character’. When the interviewer Robert Capps puts it to Nolan that there might be several explanations of the film’s ending, that the ‘right answer’ is impossible to find, the director flatly contradicts him: ‘Oh no, I’ve got an answer.’ But Nolan’s remarks may only be another act of misdirection; and, if a century of cultural theory has taught us anything, it is that an author’s supposed intentions can only ever constitute a supplementary (para)text, never a final word. What are Nolan’s films about, after all, but the instability of any master position? They are full of moments in which the manipulator – the one who looks, writes or narrates – becomes the manipulated – the object of the gaze, the character in a story written or told by someone else.



In Inception, Cobb is an ‘extractor’, an expert at a special kind of industrial espionage, which involves entering into people’s dreams and stealing their secrets. He and his team have been hired by hyper-wealthy businessman Saito to infiltrate the dreams of Robert Fischer, the heir to a massive energy conglomerate. But this time Cobb’s team is not required to extract information, but to do something which the film tells is much more difficult: they are tasked with implanting an idea into Fischer’s mind. Cobb’s effectiveness as a dream thief is compromised by the projection of his dead wife, Mal, the pathological stain he now brings with him into any dream caper. Mal died after she suffered an apparent psychotic break. She and Cobb set up a lover’s retreat in the ‘unconstructed dreamspace’ that the dream thieves call Limbo. But after she became too attached to this virtual love nest, Cobb ‘incepted’ in her the idea that the world in which they were living was not real. As Cobb mordantly observes, there is nothing more resilient than an idea. Even when she is restored to what Cobb takes to be reality, Mal remains obsessed with the idea that she the world around her is not real, so she throws herself from a hotel window in order to return to what she believes is the real world. The film turns on how Cobb deals with this traumatic event – in order to incept Fischer, Cobb has first of all to descend into Limbo and defeat Mal. He achieves this by simultaneously accepting his part in Mal’s death and by repudiating the Mal projection as an inadequate copy of his dead wife. With the Mal projection vanquished and the dream-heist successfully completed, Cobb is finally able to return to the  children from whom he has been separated. Yet this ending has more than a suggestion of wish fulfilment fantasy about it, and the suspicion that Cobb might be marooned somewhere in a multi-layered oneirc labyrinth, a psychotic who has mistaken dreams for reality, makes Inception deeply ambiguous. Nolan’s own remarks have carefully maintained the ambiguity.’ I choose to believe that Cobb gets back to his kids,’ Nolan told Robert Capps.



Nolan’s films are preoccupied with, to paraphrase Memento’s Teddy, ‘the lies that we tell ourselves to stay happy’. Yet the situation is worse even than that. It’s one thing to lie to oneself; it’s another to not even know whether one is lying to oneself or not. This might be the case with Cobb in Inception, and it’s notable that, in the Wired interview, Nolan says that ‘The most important emotional thing about the top spinning at the end is that Cobb is not looking at it. He doesn’t care.’ Not caring whether we are lying to ourselves may be the price for happiness – or at least the price one pays for release from excruciating mental anguish. In this respect, Dormer in Insomnia (2002) could be the anti-Cobb. His inability to sleep – which naturally also means an inability to dream – correlates with the breakdown of his capacity to tell himself a comforting story about who he is. After the shooting of his partner, Dormer’s identity collapses into a terrifying epistemological void, a black box that cannot be opened. He simply doesn’t know whether or not he intended to kill his partner (just as Borden in The Prestige cannot remember which knot he tied on the night that Angier’s wife died in a bungled escapology act.) But in Nolan’s worlds, it is not only that we deceive ourselves; it is also that we are deceived about having a self. There is no separating identity from fiction. In Memento, Lenny literally writes (on) himself, but the very fact that he can write a script for future versions of himself is a horrifying demonstration of his lack of any coherent identity – a revelation that his Sisyphian quest both exemplifies and is in flight from.  _Inception_  leaves us with the possibility that Cobb’s quest and apparent rediscovery of his children could be a version of the same kind of loop: a Purgatorio to Memento’s Inferno.

‘The urge to rewrite ourselves as real-seeming fictions is present in us all,’ writes Christopher Priest in his novel The Glamour. It’s not at all surprising that Nolan has adapted a novel by Priest, since there are striking parallels between the two men’s methods and interests. Priest’s novels are also ‘puzzles that can’t be solved’, in which writing, biography and psychosis slide into one another, posing troubling ontological questions about memory, identity and fiction. The idea of minds as datascapes which can be infiltrated inevitably puts one in mind of the ‘consensual hallucination’ of Gibson’s cyberspace, but the dreamsharing concept can be traced back to Priest and his extraordinary 1977 novel, A Dream of Wessex. In Priest’s novel, a group of researcher-volunteers use a ‘dream projector’ to enter into a shared dream of a (then) future England. Like the dreamsharing addicts we briefly glimpse in one of Inception’s most suggestive scenes, some of the characters in A Dream of Wessex inevitably prefer the simulated environment to the real world, and, unlike Cobb, they choose to stay there. The differences in the way that the concept of shared dreaming is handled in 1977 and 2010 tell us a great deal about the contrasts between social democracy and neoliberalism. While Inception’s dreamsharing technology is – like the internet – a military invention turned into a commercial application, Priest’s shared dream project is government-run. The Wessex dream world is lyrical and languid, still part of the hazy afterglow of 60s psychedelia. It’s all a far cry from Inception’s noise and fury, the mind as a militarised zone.

Inception (not entirely satisfactorily) synthesizes the intellectual and metaphysical puzzles of Memento and The Prestige (2006) with the big budget ballistics of Batman Begins (2005) and The Dark Knight (2008). The problem is the prolonged action sequences, which come off as perfunctory at best. At points, it as  if Inception’s achievement is to have provided a baroquely sophisticated motivation for some very dumb action sequences. An unkind viewer might think that the entirety of Inception’s complex ontological structure had been constructed to justify clichés of action cinema – such as the ludicrous amount of things that characters can do in the time that it takes for a van to fall from a bridge into a river. Blogger Carl Neville complains that Inception amounts to ‘three uninvolving action movies playing out simultaneously’ ‘What could have been a fascinatingly vertiginous trip into successively fantastic, impossible worlds, not to mention the limbo of the raw unconscious into which a couple of the central characters plunge,’ Neville argues,

ends up looking wholly like a series of action movies, one within the other: “reality” looks and feels like a “globalisation” movie, jumping from Tokyo to Paris to Mombasa to Sydney with a team of basically decent technical geniuses who are forced to live outside the law, making sure there are lots of helicopter shots of cityscapes and exotic local colour. Level one dream is basically The Bourne Identity…rainy, grey, urban. Level two is the Matrix, zero gravity fistfights in a modernist hotel, level three, depressingly, turns out to be a 70s Bond film while the raw Id is basically just a collapsing cityscape.

The ‘level three’ snow scenes at least resemble one of the most visually striking Bond films – 1969’s On Her Majesty’s Secret Service – but it’s hard not to share Neville’s sense of anti-climax. Rather than picking up pace and ramping up the metaphysical complexity, the film rushes towards its disappointing denouement. The elaborate set-up involving the ‘dream architect’ Ariadne is summarily abandoned, as she is told to forget the labyrinth and ‘find the most direct route through.’ When Ariadne and the film accede to these demands, it as if the  imperatives of the action thriller have crashed through the intricacies of Nolan’s puzzle narrative with all the subtlety of the freight train that erupts into the cityscape in an earlier scene.



Neville is right that Inception is very far from being a ‘fascinat-ingly vertiginous trip into successively fantastic, impossible worlds’, but it is worth thinking about why Nolan showed such restraint. (His parsimony couldn’t contrast more starkly with the stylistic extravagances of something like Peter Jackson’s The Lovely Bones (2009), which aims at the fantastic and the impossible, but ends up CGI-onanistic rather than lyrically oneiric.) One initially strange thing about Inception is how un-dreamlike the dreams in the film are. It’s tempting to see the Nolan of Inception as a reverse Hitchcock – where Hitchcock took De Chirico-like dream topographies and remotivated them as thriller spaces, Nolan takes standard action flick sequences and repackages them as dreams. Except in a scene where the walls seem to close in around Cobb when he is being pursued – which, interestingly, takes place in the film’s apparent ‘reality’ – the spatial distortions at work in Inception do not resemble the ways in which dreams distend or collapse space. There are none of the bizarre adjacencies or distances that do not diminish that we see in Welles’s The Trial (1962), a film which, perhaps better than any other, captures the uncanny topographies of the anxiety dream. When, in one of Inception’s most remarked upon scenes, Ariadne causes the Paris cityspace to fold up around herself and Cobb, she is behaving more like the CGI engineer who is creating the scene than any dreamer. This is a display of technical prowess, devoid of any charge of the uncanny. The Limbo scenes, meanwhile, are like an inverted version of Fredric Jameson’s ‘surrealism without the unconscious’: this is an unconscious without surrealism. The world that Cobb and Mal ‘create’ out of their memories is like a Powerpoint presentation of a love affair rendered as some walk-through simulation: faintly haunting in its very lack of allure, quietly horrifying in its solipsistic  emptiness. Where the unconscious was, there CGI shall be.

In an influential blog post, Devin Faraci argues that the whole film is a metaphor for cinematic production itself: Cobb is the director, Arthur the producer, Ariadne the screenwriter, Saito ‘the big corporate suit who fancies himself a part of the game’, Fischer the audience. ‘Cobb, as a director, takes Fischer through an engaging, stimulating and exciting journey,’ Faraci argues, ‘one that leads him to an understanding about himself. Cobb is the big time movie director…who brings the action, who brings the spectacle, but who also brings the meaning and the humanity and the emotion.’ In fact, as a director Cobb is something of a mediocrity (who we must conclude is far less accomplished than Nolan) – as Neville argues, Fischer’s ‘journey’ takes him through a series of standard-issue action set pieces, which are ‘engaging, stimulating and exciting’ only in some weakly generic way. Significantly and symptomatically, Faraci’s hyperbole here sounds as if it might belong in a marketing pitch for Cobb and his team; just as when Cobb and the others eulogise the ‘creativity’ of the dream architecture process – you can create worlds that never existed! – they sound like they are reciting advertising copy or the script from a corporate video. The scenes in which the team prepare for Fischer’s inception might have been designed to bring out the depressing vacuousness of the concept of the ‘creative industries’. They play like a marketing team’s own fantasies about what they themselves are doing: the view from inside an Apprentice contestant’s head, perhaps. In any case, Inception seems to be less a meta-meditation on the power of cinema than a reflection of the way in which cinematic techniques have become imbricated into a banal spectacle which – fusing business machismo, entertainment protocols and breathless hype – enjoys an unprecedented dominion over our working lives and our dreaming minds.

It is no doubt this sense of pervasive mediation, of generalised simulation, that tempts Faraci into claiming that ‘Inception  is a dream to the point where even the dream-sharing stuff is a dream. Dom Cobb isn’t an extractor. He can’t go into other people’s dreams. He isn’t on the run from the Cobol Corporation. At one point he tells himself this, through the voice of Mal, who is a projection of his own subconscious. She asks him how real he thinks his world is, where he’s being chased across the globe by faceless corporate goons.’ The moment when Mal confronts Cobb with all this is reminiscent of the scene in Verhoeven’s Total Recall (1990) when a psychiatrist attempts to persuade Arnold Schwarzenegger’s Quaid that he is having a psychotic breakdown. But while Total Recall presents us with a strong distinction between Quaid’s quotidian identity as a construction worker and his life as a secret agent at the centre of an interplanetary struggle – a distinction that the film very quickly unsettles – Inception gives us only Cobb the generic hero: handsome, dapper, yet troubled. If, as Faraci claims, Cobb isn’t an extractor and he isn’t on the run from faceless corporate goons, then who is he? The ‘real’ Cobb would then be an unrepresented X, outside the film’s reality labyrinth – the empty figure who identifies with (and as) Cobb the commercially-constructed fiction; ourselves, in other words, insofar as we are successfully interpellated by the film.



This leads to another difference between Inception and its Philip K Dick-inspired 80s and 90s precursors such as Total Recall, Videodrome (1983) and Existenz (1999). There is very little of the ‘reality bleed’, the confusion of ontological hierarchy, that defined those films: throughout Inception, it is surprisingly easy for both the audience and the characters to remember where they are in the film’s ontological architecture. When Ariadne is being trained by Cobb’s partner, Arthur, she is taken round a virtual model of the impossible Penrose Steps. On the face of it, however, Inception is remarkable for its seeming failure to explore any paradoxical Escheresque topologies. The four different reality levels remain distinct, just as the causality between them remains  well-formed. But this apparently stable hierarchy might be violated by the object upon which much of the discussion of the film’s ending has centred: the thimble, the ‘totem’ that Cobb ostensibly uses to determine whether he is in waking reality or not. If it spins without falling, then he is in a dream. If it falls, then he is not. Many have noted the inadequacy of this supposed proof. At best, it can only establish that Cobb is not in his ‘own’ dream, for what is there to stop his dreaming mind simulating the properties of the real thimble? Besides, in the film’s chronology, the thimble – that ostensible token of the empirical actual – first of all appears as a virtual object, secreted by Mal inside a doll’s house in Limbo. And a totem, it should be remembered, is an object of faith (it’s worth noting in passing that there are many references to faith throughout the film).

The association of the thimble with Mal – there are online debates as to whether the thimble was first of all Cobb’s or Mal’s – is suggestive. Both Mal and the thimble represent competing versions of the Real. For Cobb, the thimble stands in for the Anglo-Saxon empiricist tradition’s account of what reality is – something sensible, tangible. Mal, by contrast, represents a psychoanalytic Real – a trauma that disrupts any attempt to maintain a stable sense of reality; that which the subject cannot help bringing with him no matter where he goes. (Mal’s malevolent, indestructible persistence recalls the sad resilience of the projections which haunt the occupants of the space station in Tarkovsky’s Solaris (1972).) No matter what ‘reality level’ Cobb is on, Mal and the thimble are always there. But where the thimble supposedly ‘belongs’ to the ‘highest’ reality level, Mal ‘belongs’ to the ‘lowest’ level, the lover’s limbo which Cobb repudiated.

Mal conflates two roles that had been kept separate in Nolan’s films – the antagonist-double and the grief object. In Nolan’s debut, Following (1998), the antagonist-double of the unnamed protagonist is the thief who shares his name with Inception’s hero. The theme of the antagonist-double is nowhere more  apparent than in Nolan’s remake of Insomnia and The Dark Knight, films which are in many ways about the proximity between the ostensible hero and his beyond-good-and-evil rival. Nolan’s adaptation of Christopher Priest’s novel, The Prestige, meanwhile, is in effect a film in which there is a defining antagonism but no single protagonist: by the end of the film, the illusionists Angier and Borden are doubled in multiple ways, just as they are defined and destroyed by their struggle with one another. More often than not, grief is the source of these antagonistic doublings. Grief itself is a puzzle that cannot be solved, and there’s a certain (psychic) economy in collapsing the antagonist into the grief object, since the work of grief is not only about mourning the lost object, it is also about struggling against the object’s implacable refusal to let go. Yet there’s something hollow about Cobb’s grief; on its own terms, it doesn’t convince as anything other than a genre-required character trait. It instead to stand in for something else, another sadness – a loss that the film points to but can’t name.



One aspect of this loss concerns the unconscious itself, and here we might take Nolan’s script quite literally. For those with a psychoanalytic bent, the script’s repeated references to the ‘subconscious’ – as opposed to the unconscious – no doubt grate, but this might have been a Freudian slip of a particularly revealing kind. The terrain that Inception lays out is no longer that of the classical unconscious, that impersonal factory which, Jean-Francois Lyotard says, psychoanalysis described ‘with the help of images of foreign towns or countries such as Rome or Egypt, just like Piranesi’s Prisons or Escher’s Other Worlds’. (Libidinal Economy, Athlone, 1993, 164) Inception’s arcades and hotel corridors are indeed those of a globalised capital, whose reach easily extends into the former depths of what was once the unconscious. There is nothing alien, no other place here, only a ‘subconscious’ recirculating deeply familiar images mined from an ersatz psychoanalysis. So in place of the eerie enigmas of the  unconscious, we are instead offered an Oedipal-lite scene played out between Robert Fischer and a projection of his dead father. The off-the-shelf pre-masticated quality of this encounter is entirely lacking in any of the weird idiosyncrasies which give Freud’s case histories their power to haunt. Cod Freudianism has long been metabolised by an advertising-entertainment culture which is now ubiquitous, as psychoanalysis gives way to a psychotherapeutic self-help that is diffused through mass media. It’s possible to read Inception as a staging of this superseding of psychoanalysis, with Cobb’s apparent victory over the Mal projection, his talking himself around to accepting that she is just a fantasmatic substitute for his dead wife, almost a parody of psychotherapy’s blunt pragmatism.



The question of whether Cobb is still dreaming or not at the film’s end is ultimately too simple. For there is also the problem of whose dream Cobb might be in, if not his ‘own’. The old Freudian paradigm made this a problem too, of course – but there the issue was the fact that the ego was not master in its own house because the subject was constitutively split by the unconscious. In Inception, the ego is still not a master in its own house, but that is because the forces of predatory business are everywhere. Dreams have ceased to be the spaces where private pyschopathologies are worked through and have become the scenes where competing corporate interests play out their banal struggles. Inception’s ‘militarised subconscious’ converts the infernal urgencies and languid poise of the old unconscious into panicked persecution and a consolatory familialism: pursued at work by videogame gunmen, you later unwind with the kids building sandcastles on a beach. This is another reason that the dreams in Inception appear so undream-like. For, after all, these are not ‘dreams’ in any conventional sense. The designed virtual spaces of Inception’s dreams, with their nested ‘levels’, evidently resemble a videogame more than they recall dreams. In the era of neuromarketing, we are presided over by what J G Ballard called  ‘fictions of every kind’, the embedded literature of branding consultancies, advertising agencies and games manufacturers. All of which makes one of Inception’s premisses – that it is difficult to implant an idea in someone’s mind – strangely quaint. Isn’t ‘inception’ what so much late capitalist cognitive labour is about?

For inception to work, Arthur and Cobb tell Saito early in the film, the subject must believe that the implanted idea is their own. The self-help dictums of psychotherapy – which Cobb affirms at the end of Inception – offer invaluable assistance in this ideological operation. As Eva Illouz argues, discussing the very conversion of psychoanalysis into self-help that Inception dramatises, ‘if we secretly desire our misery, then the self can be made directly responsible for alleviating it…The contemporary Freudian legacy is, and ironically so, that we are in the full masters in our own house, even when, or perhaps especially when, it is on fire.’ (Cold Intimacies: The Making of Emotional Capitalism, Polity, 2007, 47) Yet our misery, like our dreams, our cars and our refrigerators, is in fact the work of many anonymous hands. This impersonal misery may be what Inception is ultimately about. The ostensibly upbeat ending and all the distracting boy-toy action cannot dispel the non-specific but pervasive pathos that hangs over the film. It’s a sadness that arises from the impasses of a culture in which business has closed down any possibility of an outside – a situation that Inception exemplifies, rather than comments on. You yearn for foreign places, but everywhere you go looks like local colour for the film set of a commercial; you want to be lost in Escheresque mazes, but you end up in an interminable car chase.