Simulations and Unworlding: Rainer Werner Fassbinder and Philip K. Dick

There is another type of weird effect that is generated by strange loops. The strange loops here involve not just tangles in cause and effect of the type we discussed in the last chapter in reference to the time loop story, but confusions of ontological level. Brian McHale devotes much of his _Postmodernist Fiction_ to analyzing these confusions. What should be at an ontologically “inferior” level suddenly appears one level up (characters from a simulated world suddenly appear in the world generating the simulation); or what should be at an ontologically “superior” level appears one level down (authors interact with their characters). Escher’s images exemplify the paradoxical spaces of this strange loop. There is a definite weirdness in this Escher-effect, which, after all, is fundamentally about a sense of wrongness: levels are tangled, things are not where they are supposed to be.

Although McHale does refer to Dick, to whom we shall turn in a moment, many of the texts that he discusses render this confusion of worlds in a literary-metafictional register. I want to discuss now two texts which — on the edge of the science fiction genre — deal with the question of simulated or embedded worlds in a way that emphasises weirdness.

Let’s turn first to _Welt am Draht_ (_World on a Wire_), a two-part production made for the Westdeutscher Rundfunk public service television channel in 1973. It was an adaptation of Daniel F. Galouye’s science fiction novel _Simulacron-3_ by none other than Rainer Werner Fassbinder.

One of the opening scenes centres on a mirror: a small hand-mirror that the obviously disturbed head of the Simulacron project, Professor Vollmer, frantically waves in the face of his colleagues, saying, “You are only the image that others have of you.” The project has created a computer-generated world, populated by “identity units” who believe themselves to be real people. Vollmer dies, and is replaced by the programmer Stiller, who soon becomes obsessed with the enigma that drove Vollmer into madness — that their “real world” is also a simulation, engineered by a “realer” world above.

The ambient social scene in the film seems to confirm Vollmer’s idea that we are what we are perceived to be. There is barely a scene that doesn’t feature a reflective surface, and some of the most memorable shots show reflections of reflections, infinite regresses of simulacra. The background figures in crowd scenes have a curiously agog immobility, as if they are spectators at a stageplay. One early scene is like an extrapolation from a Bryan Ferry album sleeve of the early 1970s: in an atmosphere of louche decadence, the business and cultural elite linger like models or gawp like voyeurs as they stand around a swimming pool, its reflected light playing on the then-futuristic interiors.

Much like Tarkovsky’s take on SF in _Solaris_ and _Stalker_ (which we shall discuss later), it is Fassbinder’s deviation from certain science fictional conventions that gives _World on a Wire_ a special charge — especially in the wake of _Star Wars_ and _The Matrix_. While both those films were defined by their special effects, there are no visual effects to speak of in _World on a Wire_. The most conspicuous “effect” is the startling Radiophonic Workshop-like squiggles and spurts of electronic music, which break into Fassbinder’s stylised naturalism like a crack in reality itself.

In _World on a Wire_, the strange loop is created by “Einstein”, the identity unit in Simulacron that those in The Institute for Cybernetics and Future Science use to communicate directly with in the simulated world. In order to perform this liaising function, Einstein naturally has to be aware that he is a simulation. But this knowledge inevitably produces the desire to climb up to the “real” world — a desire, it is implied, that can never be satisfied.

The ontological terror on which _World on a Wire_ turns — is our own world a simulation? — is now very familiar, via the many Philip K. Dick adaptations and their imitators. But, despite not actually being an adaptation of Dick’s fiction, _World on a Wire_ has more in common with the wry mordancy of Dick’s work than many official Dick adaptations, not least in the way that it shows each of its three nested worlds as being equally drab. We actually see very little of the world “below” (the world inside the Simulacron) and almost nothing of the world “above” (the world one level up from what we first took to be reality). The world below we see only in snatched glimpses of hotel lobbies and inside a lorry-driver’s cab. But it is the revelation — or non-revelation — of the world above at the climax of the film that is most startling. Instead of some Gnostic transfiguration, we find ourselves in what looks like a meeting room in some ultra-banal office block. At first, the electronic blinds are down, momentarily holding open the possibility that there will be some marvellous — or at least strange — world to be seen once they are up. But when they do eventually rise, we see only the same grey skies and cityscape. Stiller — whose name now assumes a special significance — has attained his official goal (climbing up to the “world above”), but he has not “moved”. The Zenonian condition remains in the form of an ontological anxiety that in a pre-echo of the torment that destroys Mal in _Inception_ follows the weird topologies of drive: once Stiller’s faith in his initial lifeworld is shattered, there is no possibility of fully believing in any reality.

The differences between the three worlds is not accessible at the level of experience (of either the characters or the audience), and it as if Fassbinder produces in _World on a Wire_ something that perfectly fits Darko Suvin’s famous definition of science fiction as the art of “cognitive estrangement”. Stiller’s mounting awareness of the simulated nature of the world that everyone around him takes for reality forces a cognitive estrangement so intense that it constitutes a psychotic break. The _content_ of his experience is the same in every respect; but, because it is now classified as a simulation, it is psychotically transformed. But, as is so often in the fiction of Dick, the position of the psychotic is also the position of truth.

“Cognitive estrangement” here takes the form of an unworlding, an abyssal falling away of any sense that there is any “fundamental” level which could operate as a foundation or a touchstone, securing and authenticating what is ultimately real. The film generates what you might call a cognitive weird, in that the weird here is not directly seen or experienced; it is a cognitive effect, produced by depriving the film’s formal realism of any feeling of reality.

Philip K. Dick’s _Time Out of Joint_, published in 1959, performs a similar estrangement of realism, as well as presenting another version of unworlding. The novel is remarkable, in fact, for the painstaking way in which Dick constructs a “realistic” small town America. Two years after the first Disneyland park opened — Dick would become a frequent visitor to the park in LA — the novel treats literary realism as a kind of Disneyfication. In a classic moment of Dick ontological vertigo, the novel’s painstakingly described small town is revealed, in the end, to be an intricate system of pasteboard frontages, hypnotic suggestions and negative hallucinations (we shall return to the question of negative hallucinations later). The pay-off can just as easily be read in terms of critical metafiction as science fiction, for what is any setting in realist fiction if not the same kind of system? How is any “reality effect” achieved except by authors using the literary equivalent of these simulatory techniques? In _Time Out of Joint_, the machinery of realism becomes, then, re-described as a set of special effects.

In the novel, the feeling of the weird is not generated by a collision of worlds, but by the passage out of a “realistic” world into an “unworld”. After it is downgraded to a simulation, the realistic world is not so much invaded as erased. In the novel, the whole small town scenario is constructed as a ruse, a comfortable setting in which the protagonist can undertake high pressure military work for the government while thinking that he is doing a trivial newspaper contest. Yet it is clear that the science fictional elements were for Dick the pretext that allowed him to write successfully in a naturalistic way about Fifties America. They were the enframing devices that enabled _Time Out of Joint_ to succeed where Dick’s purely realist fiction failed.

In _Postmodernism_, _or the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism_, Jameson captures the peculiar ache of nostalgia that _Time Out of Joint_ engenders, a _nostalgia for the present_, which Dick achieves by constellating stereotypical images of the decade he was writing at the end of:

President Eisenhower’s stroke; Main Street, U.S.A.; Marilyn Monroe; a world of neighbours and PTAs; small retail stores (the produce trucked in from outside); favourite television programmes; mild flirtations with the housewife next door; game shows and contests; sputniks directly revolving over-head, mere blinking lights in the firmament, hard to distinguish from airliners or flying saucers.

(Monroe actually features as one of the anomalies that leads to the unraveling of the simulated small town, for she has not been incorporated into the reconstructed 1950s world, and appears to the main character only when he discovers some rotting magazines, relics of our Fifties, in a waste ground “outside the city limits”.)

What is remarkable is the way in which Dick was capable, in 1959, of already identifying those stereotypical features of the American Fifties which would come to define the decade in retrospect. It is not Dick’s skill in projecting into the future that is to be admired — the novel’s 1997 is confected out of generic SF tropes, far less convincing than the ostensibly fake Fifties world it embeds — but rather his capacity to imagine how the future would see the Fifties. It is the Fifties already envisaged as a themepark: an anticipated reconstruction. Dick’s simulated small town is not en-kitsched as Disney’s memories of his early twentieth century were, but precisely given what Jameson calls the “cabbage stink” of naturalism:

The misery of happiness, \[…\] of Marcuse’s false happiness, the gratifications of the new car, the TV dinner and your favourite programme on the sofa — which are now themselves secretly a misery, an unhappiness that doesn’t know its name, that has no way of telling itself apart from genuine satisfaction and fulfilment since it has presumably never encountered this last.

In this lukewarm world, ambient discontent hides in plain view, a hazy malaise given off by the refrigerators, television sets and other consumer durables. The vividness and plausibility of this miserable world — with misery itself contributing to the world’s plausibility — somehow becomes all the more intense when its status is downgraded to that of a constructed simulation. The world is a simulation but it still _feels_ real.

Some of the most powerful passages in Dick’s work are those in which there is an ontological interregnum: a traumatic unworlding is not yet given a narrative motivation; an unresolved space that awaits reincorporation into another symbolic regime. In _Time Out of Joint_, the interregnum takes the form of an extraordinary scene in which the seemingly dull objects of quotidian naturalism — the gas station and the motel — act almost like a negative version of the lamppost at the edge of the Narnian forest. Unlike Lewis’ lamppost, these objects do not mark the threshold of a new world; they constitute instead staging posts on the way towards a desert of the Real, a void beyond any constituted world. When the edge-oftown gas stations come into focus, the background furniture of literary realism suddenly looms into the foreground, and there is a moment of object-epiphany, in which peripheral vision-familiarity transforms into something alien:

The houses became fewer. The truck passed gas stations, tawdry cafes, ice cream stands and motels. The dreary parade of motels ... as if, Ragle thought, we had already gone a thousand miles and were just now entering a strange town. Nothing is so alien, so bleak and unfriendly, as the strip of gas stations — cut-rate gas stations — and motels at the edge of your own city. You fail to recognise it. And, at the same time, you have to grasp it to your bosom. Not just for one night, but for as long as you intend to live where you live. But we don’t intend to live here any more. We’re leaving. For good.

It’s a scene in which Edward Hopper seems to devolve into Beckett, as the natural(ist) landscape gives way to an emptied-out monotony, a minimal, quasi-abstract space that is de-peopled but still industrialised and commercialised: “A last intersection, a minor road serving industries that had been zoned out of the city proper. The railroad tracks... he noticed an infinitely long freight train at rest. The suspended drums of chemicals on towers over factories.” It is as if Dick is slowly clearing away the fixtures and fittings of literary realism in order to prepare the way for the unworlding which he had described a few pages earlier:

Hollow outward form instead of substance; the sun not actually shining, the day not actually warm at all but cold, grey and quietly raining, raining, the god-awful ash filtering down on everything. No grass except charred stumps, broken off. Pools of contaminated water... The skeleton of life, white brittle scarecrow support in the shape of a cross. Grinning. Space instead of eyes. The whole world \[…\] can be seen through. I am on the inside looking out. Peeking through a crack and seeing — emptiness. Looking into its eyes.