The Weird Against the Worldly: H.G. Wells

I want now to approach the weird from a different angle, via a reading of H.G. Wells’ short story “The Door in the Wall”. I believe this story possesses a strong weird charge, even though it is very different from Lovecraft’s work.

The narrator is Redmond, and the story concerns his friend, the politician Lionel Wallace. Wallace tells Redmond of his childhood memory of seeing a green door in a wall somewhere in the streets of West Kensington in London. For some reason, he was attracted to opening the door. Initially, he was apprehensive, feeling it is “unwise or wrong” to go through the door, but “in a gust of emotion”, he overcomes these anxieties and runs through the Door in the Wall. The garden beyond the Door in the Wall has something of the feel of a surrealist painting by Delvaux or Ernst — there is an atmosphere of languid joy, while a diffuse sense of kindness seems to emanate from all of the people he meets there. There are anomalous things there — he sees a pair of panthers, and some kind of book in which the images “were not pictures but realities”. Whether this book is a magical object, an example of advanced technology, or the product of some kind of intoxicant is not clear. After a while, though, when he is looking through this book, he suddenly finds himself seeing “a long grey street in West Kensington, on that chill hour of afternoon before the lamps are lit, and I was there, a wretched little figure, weeping aloud”. However, for reasons that are not fully clear — why does he not immediately go through the Door in the Wall again? — he cannot return straight away. Once again consigned to the mundane world, he is overcome by a sense of “ungovernable grief”.

Wallace only sees the Door in the Wall a few years later, initially by accident. He “got entangled among some rather low-class streets on the other side of Campden Hill”, until he sees the long white wall and the door that leads into the garden. However, this time he does not go through. He feels he will be late for school, so he will return later, when he has more time. He makes the mistake of telling some school friends about the door and the garden. They force Wallace to take them there, but he cannot find it.

He sees the door again a couple of times in his youth — once when he is on the way to collect his scholarship for Oxford — but, again consumed by the urgencies of everyday life, he passes by without going through the door. In recent years, as he enters middle age, Wallace is once again haunted by the door, and fears that he may never see it again:

Years of hard work after that and never a sight of the door. It’s only recently it has come back to me. With it there has come a sense as though some thin tarnish had spread itself over my world. I began to think of it as a sorrowful and bitter thing that I should never see that door again. Perhaps I was suffering a little from overwork — perhaps it was what I’ve heard spoken of as the feeling of forty. I don’t know. But certainly the keen brightness that makes effort easy has gone out of things recently…

Yet he does see the door again — three times. But each time he passes it by — because he is embroiled in important political business; because he is en route to his father’s deathbed; because he is engaged in a conversation about his position. When Wallace recounts this to Redmond, he is racked with anguish about his failure to go through the door. It doesn’t surprise us to learn that the next thing Redmond hears of Wallace is that he is dead. His body is discovered “in a deep excavation near East Kensington Station”.

Why should “The Door in the Wall” be classified as a weird tale? The problem of worlds — of contact between incommensurable worlds — is clearly something that the story shares with Lovecraft, and this brings us once again to the heart of the weird. As we began to explore in the last chapter, weird fiction always presents us with a threshold between worlds. “The Door in the Wall”, evidently, centres on just such a threshold. Much of its power derives from the opposition between the mundanity of the London setting, with its quotidian details — “he recalls a number of mean, dirty shops, and particularly that of a plumber and decorator, with a dusty disorder of earthenware pipes, sheet lead ball taps, pattern books of wall paper, and tins of enamel” — and the world beyond the door.

Lovecraft’s stories are full of thresholds between worlds: often the egress will be a book (the dreaded _Necronomicon_), sometimes, as in the case of the Randolph Carter “Silver Key” stories, it is literally a portal. Gateways and portals routinely feature in the deeply Lovecraftian stories of the Marvel Comics character Doctor Strange. David Lynch’s film and television work is similarly fixated on doorways, curtains and gateways: as we shall see later, _Inland Empire_ appears to be a “holey space” constructed out of thresholds between worlds, an ontological rabbit warren. Sometimes the threshold into another world may only be a matter of re-scaling: Richard Matheson’s _The Incredible Shrinking Man_ demonstrates that your own living-room can be a space of weird wonder and dread if you become sufficiently small.

The centrality of doors, thresholds and portals means that the notion of _the between_ is crucial to the weird. It is clear that if Wells’ story had taken place only in the garden behind the wall, then no weird charge would have been produced. (This is why a feeling of the weird attaches to the lamppost at the edge of Narnia in C.S. Lewis’ stories, but not to Narnia proper.) If the story were set entirely beyond the door, we would be in the realm of the fantasy genre. This mode of fantasy naturalises other worlds. But the weird de-naturalises all worlds, by exposing their instability, their openness to the outside.

One obvious point of departure from the formula of the Lovecraftian tale is the lack of any inhuman entities in “The Door in the Wall”. When Wallace passes through the door, he encounters strange beings, but they appear to be human. The feeling of the weird that the story gives rise to is not primarily produced by these languid, beneficent beings; and the weird does not require any of the “abominable monstrosities” which are so central to Lovecraft’s tales.

A second difference between Lovecraft and “The Door in the Wall” concerns the question of suspense. As we have seen, Lovecraft’s stories are rarely characterised by a feeling of suspense: we are not left wondering if the outside is real or not. At the end of “The Door in the Wall”, by contrast, Redmond finds his mind “darkened with questions and riddles”. He cannot dismiss the possibility that Wallace was suffering from an “unprecedented type of hallucination”. Wallace was either a madman or a “dreamer, a man of vision and the imagination”. “We see our world fair and common,” Redmond concludes, inconclusively, “the hoarding and the pit. By our daylight standard he walked out of security into darkness, danger and death. But did he see like that?”

This brings us to a third difference between Lovecraft and this story: the question of insanity. In Lovecraft’s tales, any insanity the characters experience is a _consequence_ of the transcendental shock that the encounter with the outside produces; there is no question of the insanity _causing_ characters to perceive the entities (whose status would then, evidently, be degraded; they would merely be products of a delirium). “The Door in the Wall” leaves open the question of psychosis: it is possible — though Redmond doubts it, it is not his “profoundest belief” — that Wallace is mad, or is deluded, or has confabulated the whole experience from garbled childhood memories (which, to use a distinction from Freud’s essay on “Screen Memory” would then be memories _of_ childhood, not memories _from_ childhood). Wallace himself suspects that he may have augmented a childhood memory — re-dreamed it — to the point of completely distorting it.

But perhaps the most decisive difference between “The Door in the Wall” and Lovecraft consists in the quality of longing that is central to Wells’ story. In Lovecraft, the positive lure of the outside has to be repressed and inverted, transformed into loathing and dread. But the appeal of the world beyond the door shines through “The Door in the Wall”. The key opposition structuring the story is not naturalism versus the supernatural — there is little to suggest that the world behind the wall is supernatural, though it is certainly “enchanted” — it is the opposition between the quotidian and the numinous. Wallace’s description of an “indescribable quality of translucent unreality, \[different\] from the common things of experience that hung about it all” recalls Rudolf Otto’s characterisation of the numinous in _The Idea of the Holy_. Yet, for both Wallace and Otto, an “indescribable quality of translucent unreality” accompanies encounters with that which is _more_ real than “the common things of experience”. The Real does not _feel_ real; it involves a heightening of sensation, exceeds the parameters of ordinary experience, but to Wallace “at least the Door in the Wall was a real door leading through a real wall to immortal realities.”

Michel Houellebecq entitled his book on Lovecraft _Against the World, Against Life_, but it might be that Lovecraft’s real antipathy was to the worldly, to the mean confines of the mundane, which his tales endlessly explode. The attack on the deficiencies of the worldly is surely one of the driving imperatives of “The Door in the Wall”. “Oh! the wretchedness of that return!” Wallace complains, when he finds himself back in “this grey world again”. Wallace feels that he is depressed because he has yielded to the temptations of the worldly.

When Wallace describes his grief, he seems to be a plaything of the psychoanalytic death drive. “The fact is — it isn’t a case of ghosts or apparitions — but — it’s an odd thing to tell of, — I am haunted. I am haunted by something — that rather takes the light out of things, that fills me with longings…” Reflecting on Wallace’s first encounter with the door, Redmond pictures “the figure of that little boy, _drawn and repelled_” (emphasis added). Freud describes the death drive in terms of just this ambivalent attraction towards what is unpleasurable. It is Lacan and his followers who have drawn out the strange geometries of the death drive, the way in which desire perpetuates itself by always missing its official object of satisfaction — just as Wallace repeatedly fails to go through the door, even though this is apparently his deepest desire. The pull exerted by the door and the garden deprives all of his worldly satisfactions and achievements of their flavour:

Now that I have the clue to it, the thing seems written visibly in his face. I have a photograph in which that look of detachment has been caught and intensified. It reminds me of what a woman once said of him — a woman who had loved him greatly. ‘Suddenly,’ she said, ‘the interest goes out of him. He forgets you. He doesn’t care a rap for you — under his very nose…’

The door was always a threshold leading beyond the pleasure principle, and into the weird.