   

_star wars_ was a  
sellout from the start[[null|]][^1]

Does Disney’s acquisition of Lucasfilm mean that _Star Wars_ has sold out? Can the _Star Wars_ franchise retain its soul now it has been absorbed into a corporate conglomerate? It’s hard to believe that these questions are seriously being posed. _Star Wars_ was a sell-out from the start, and that is just about the only remarkable thing about this depressingly mediocre franchise.

The arrival of _Star Wars_ signalled the full absorption of the former counterculture into a new mainstream. Like Steven Spielberg, George Lucas was a peer of directors such as Martin Scorsese and Francis Ford Coppola, who had produced some of the great American films of the 1970s. Lucas’ own earlier films included the dystopian curio, _THX 1138_, but his most famous film was a herald of a coming situation in which mainstream cinema in America would become increasingly bland, and it would become impossible to imagine films of the quality of _The Godfather_ trilogy or _Taxi Driver_ ever being made again.

According to Walter Murch, the editor of _Apocalypse Now_, Lucas had wanted to make _Apocalypse Now_ but had been persuaded it was too controversial, so he decided to “put the essence of the story in outer space and make it in a galaxy long ago and far, far away”. _Star Wars_ was Lucas’ “transubstantiated version of _Apocalypse Now_. The rebel group were the North Vietnamese, and the Empire was the US”. Of course, by the time the film was ideologically exploited by Ronald Reagan, everything had been inverted: now it was the US who were the plucky rebels, standing up to the “evil empire” of the Soviets.

In terms of the film itself, there was nothing much very new about _Star Wars_. _Star Wars_ was a trailblazer for the kind of monumentalist pastiche which has become standard in a homogeneous Hollywood blockbuster culture that, perhaps more than any other film, _Star Wars_ played a role in inventing. The theorist Fredric Jameson cited _Star Wars_ as an example of the postmodern nostalgia film: it was a revival of “the Saturday afternoon serial of the Buck Rogers type”, which the young could experience as if it was new, while an older audience could satisfy their desire to relive forms familiar from their own youth. All that _Star Wars_ added to the formula was a certain spectacle — the spectacle of technology, via then state-of-the-art special effects and of course the spectacle of its own success, which became part of the experience of the film.

While the emphasis on effects became a catastrophe for science fiction, it was a relief for the capitalist culture of which _Star Wars_ became a symbol. Late capitalism can’t produce many new ideas anymore, but it can reliably deliver technological upgrades. But _Star Wars_ didn’t really belong to the science fiction genre anyway. J.G. Ballard acidly referred to it as “hobbits in space”, and, just as _Star Wars_ nodded back to Tolkien’s Manichean pantomime, so it paved the way for the epic tedium of Peter Jackson’s _Lord of the Rings_ adaptations.

What _Star Wars_ did invent was a new kind of commodity. What was being sold was not a particular film, but a whole world, a fictional system which could be added to forever (via sequels, prequels, novels, and any number of other tie-ins). Writers such as Tolkien and H.P. Lovecraft had invented such universes, but the _Star Wars_ franchise was the first to self-consciously commodify an invented world on a mass commercial scale.

The films became thresholds into the _Star Wars_ universe, which was soon defined as much by the merchandising surrounding the movies as by the films themselves. The success of the toys took even those involved with the film by surprise. The then small company, Kenner, purchased the rights for the _Star Wars_ action figures in late 1976, a few months ahead of the film’s theatre release in summer 1977. Unanticipated and unprecedented demand soon outstripped supply, and parents and children could not find the action figures in toy shops until Christmas 1977. This all seems rather quaint now, at a time when the merchandising surrounding blockbuster films is synchronised with a military level of organisation, and augmented by a battery of advertising and PR hype. But it was the _Star Wars_ phenomenon which gave us the first taste of this kind of film tie-in commodity supersaturation.

This is why it’s ridiculous to ask if _Star Wars_ sold out. It was _Star Wars_ which taught us what selling out really means.